---
layout: post
title: Create a Message Distribution System using NATS
date: 2020-02-29
summary: A performant, lightweight and reliable micro service for message distribution.
categories: micro service
---
# NATS Messaging System
I have written a thorough walk-through on how I  built a containerised `NATS` message distribution system. It is now published as a course on `IBM Skills Network`. I will share part of the content in this blog. 

## Five modules for creating a containerised
- Overview of NATS messaging System
- Create NATS Producer to send messages 
- Customise NATS Consumers to process messages
- Expose local host to a public host
- Deploy NATS application using Docker, Kubernetes and Helm 


# Module 1:
## NATS Overview

## Why NATS?
A modern messaging system needs to support multiple communication patterns, be secure by default, support multiple qualities of service, and provide multitenancy for a shared infrastructure. Here are the advantages of NATS: 

* Easy to use for developers and operators
* Performant 
* Always on and available
* Extremely lightweight 

## What does NATS look like?
The workflow of NATS can be simplified as:


## Use Cases of NATS
In short, NATS can be anywhere. Below are a few examples:
* Cloud Messaging
  * Services (microservices, service mesh)
  *  Event/Data Streaming 
* Command and Control
  * IoT and Edge
  * Telemetry / Sensor Data / Command and Control
* Augmenting or Replacing Legacy Messaging Systems

# Module 2 Create a NATS Producer
## Our Project
We want to provide a simple service: **sending, receiving and processing messages using NATS**

The message can be sent to NATS in many ways, in our project we assume we are sending a JSON-formatted message using HTTP POST request. A sample message can look like this:

``
{
	"subject": "someSubject",
	"message": {
		"text" : "Hello World"
	}
}
``

We are going to build a messaging system using NATS. The system has three components:
- Producer
  - Takes an HTTP request and generate the message.
- NATS
  - Stores messages generated from the Producer.
- Consumer
  - Get messages from NATS and process them.

Let's break down each component and see how they are created:
## Producer
### Why We need a Producer
One nature of NATS is that it does not deal with HTTP requests. We as developers, therefore cannot directly make an HTTP request to NATS. This is one of the reasons why NATS is light-weight and performant.

So how do we talk to NATS? We do so by creating a special "message Producer" that sends messages to NATS.

### How to create a Producer

There are a few steps we need to implement on creating a producer:
### Specify a NATS client
  Using the NATS `url`, `username` and `password` provided by the [official doc](https://docs.nats.io/developing-with-nats/connecting/default_server). 
  
  We can specify the NATS client we want to talk to. Since every time we want to talk to NATS we will forward a message, we are in fact "enquing" a message to NATS. Therefore, we can wrap the NATS client in an `enqueue` method:
  ```javascript
  async enqueue(subject: string, message: any) {
    try {
      let nc; // Define a NATS client
      if (NATS_USERNAME == undefined || NATS_PASSWORD == undefined) {
        nc = await connect(
          {
            url: NATS_URL,
            payload: Payload.JSON,
            tls: NATS_TLS
          }
        );
      } else {
        nc = await connect(
          {
            url: NATS_URL,
            payload: Payload.JSON,
            tls: NATS_TLS,
            user: NATS_USERNAME,
            pass: NATS_PASSWORD
          }
        );
      }
  ``` 

Let's quickly walk through some parameters in the above code:
* `url`: Default NATS host name to be accessed
* `username`: Username to access the url
* `password`: Password to access the url
* `payload`: Messages in NATS need payload 
* `tls`: A security protocol designed to facilitate privacy and data security for communications over the Internet 

Now we have connected to a NATS client, how do we receive and send messages to NATS?

Let's take a look at how NATS talk with Producer and Consumer  

We use two methods `subscribe` and `publish`

- Subscribers listen on a subject, and receive messages on that subject
- `subscribe` method takes two argument: `subject`, and `message`.
- Once the `subject` of the message matches the `subject` defined in `config`, the `message` will be received
- Once the `message` is received, we `publish` the message to NATS    

```javascript
// nc is the NATS client we defined in the code above
nc.subscribe(subject, (err, msg) => {
          if(err) {
              throw new err;
          } else {
            nc.close();
            console.log(' message received: ', msg);
          }
      }, {max: 1});

      nc.publish(subject, message);
    } 
```
Let's wrap them together:
```javascript
async enqueue(subject: string, message: any) {
  try {
    let nc;
    nc = await connect(
      { // specify NATS credentials
        url: NATS_URL,
        payload: Payload.JSON,
        tls: NATS_TLS,
        user: NATS_USERNAME,
        pass: NATS_PASSWORD
      }
    )
    
    // make sure NATS can be accessed through subscribe method
    await nc.subscribe(subject, (err, msg) => {
      if(err) {
          throw new err;
      } else {
        nc.close();
        console.log('Closed connection, message received: ', msg);
      }
    }, {max: 1});
    
    // make sure the message is sent to NATS
      nc.publish(subject, message);
    } catch(err) {
      console.error(`Failed to publish to ${subject}`);
      console.error(err);
      throw new err;
    }

    return true;
  }
```

# Module 3 Customise a Nats Consumer
Developers have 100% freedom to customise their own NATS consumers.

In this course, we want to create a consumer that can post the message received on NATS to a slack channel.

### Step 1: Create a NATS Consumer
Very similar to `Producer`, a NATS consumer specifies the NATS client and then subscribes to it.
We use `subscribe` method to achieve it.
```javascript
const nc = await connect(
  {
    url: NATS_URL,
    payload: Payload.JSON,
    tls: NATS_TLS,
    user: NATS_USERNAME,
    pass: NATS_PASSWORD
  }
);

nc.subscribe(NATS_SUBJECT, async (err, msg) => {
  if(err) {
    console.log(err);
  } else {
    console.log('Message received: ', msg.subject, ":", '\n', msg.data);
    await axios.post(
      process.env.SLACK_WEBHOOK,
      msg.data,
    ).then(() => {
      console.log("RESPONSE RECEIVED ON SLACK.");
    }).catch((err) => {
      console.log("AXIOS ERROR! ", err)
    })
    }
  });
```
We use `axios` module to make an HTTP `POST` request to post the message to a slack channel. 


# Module 4 Expose Local Host to Public Host
We use `route 53` from AWS to achieve it.
Once we deploy our application to `IBM cloud` registry. We will get a public host name for our application. In my case, the host name is `https://hooks.slack.com/services/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`. However, since `IBM cloud` does not provide customisation for host name, we can use `aws` to customise our host name for better readability.

The step is:
* Sign up for an `aws` account
* Buy a host name
* Search service `route 53`
* Register a domain name  

# Module 5 Dockerise the Application
## Docker
I use `docker` to containerise the whole application. I then push the image to `IBM Cloud Container Registry` to make it accessible for anyone not using my computer. As you may have guessed, `IBM Cloud Container Registry` is not for free. But I am working at IBM so I have full access. 
## Kubernetes and Helm
On top of `docker` I use `Kubernetes`(`k8s`) and `Helm` to monitor and control my application. I am not digging into too much detail in this post because I have shared other articles on that topic.